
My fellow Singaporeans, good afternoon.

Earlier today, I saw President Halimah Yacob, to advise her to dissolve Parliament and issue the Writ of Election. Let me explain why I have decided to call the general election now.

We are approaching the end of the five-year term of this Government. Under the Constitution, elections must be held at the latest by April 2021. That is less than a year away.

COVID-19
We have been fully occupied with the COVID-19 outbreak since the beginning of the year. The pandemic set upon the world suddenly. It quickly grew into a global crisis, spreading across many countries. Around the world, nearly half a million people have died, and countless more have seen their lives disrupted.

Singapore detected our first cases in January. At first, most were imported cases. But soon we observed a growing number of local cases, with no links to infected visitors. In March the numbers grew, especially later when COVID-19 started spreading among migrant workers in dormitories.

We responded decisively. We imposed a circuit breaker for two months. We made strenuous efforts to care for our migrant workers. In the dormitories, we are making steady progress, though it will take a few more months to resolve the problem. At the same time, new community cases have come down sharply. Most importantly, we have kept the number of fatalities very low. Right now, we only have one patient in the ICU in hospital.

Still, the virus has taken a heavy toll on livelihoods. Around the world, the lockdowns and the public health measures have caused a deep economic crisis. In Singapore, we have mitigated this with massive fiscal action. We passed four Budgets, injecting almost $100 billion. We are drawing from our reserves to support workers, businesses and households. These decisive emergency actions have kept retrenchments and company closures low. They have helped Singaporeans take care of their families and see through the immediate crisis.

After great effort, we are now in a stable position. We are cautiously resuming social activities, and progressively reviving our economy. Life can now become more normal than it was during the circuit breaker, provided we all continue to take the precautions seriously.

But we should be under no illusions that we have defeated COVID-19. This is just the end of the beginning phase. A long struggle lies ahead.

COVID-19 will be with us for at least a year and most probably longer, until a vaccine is developed and becomes available. It is a very difficult and tricky disease to deal with. So we have to continue keeping a close watch on the situation. Many other countries have successfully brought their cases down, only to experience fresh outbreaks after opening up again. E.g. South Korea (from nightspots in Itaewon in Seoul), China (from a market in Beijing), Germany (in an abattoir), the US (in the southern Sun Belt states). Therefore, we must be psychologically prepared for more ups and downs in this fight against COVID-19.

Economically, we must brace ourselves for a very tough period ahead. Singapore has not yet felt the full economic fallout from COVID-19, but it is coming. Despite all the measures we have taken, there will be more business closures, and more retrenchments in the coming months. Unemployment will go up.

But we are determined to save as many jobs as we can, and create new jobs too. And we will do our utmost to help businesses and industries survive and restructure themselves. That is how we can keep our capabilities and livelihoods intact through the storm, and pick up again when the sun shines once more.

COVID-19, the economy and jobs are domestic concerns. But we also face external uncertainties. Major regional and global developments can affect us. US-China tensions over many issues, now including Hong Kong. The US presidential elections in November. Border clashes between China and India. Political developments nearer home in Southeast Asia. We do not know what surprises may be in store for us within the next year. But as dangers materialise, we must navigate safely through them and protect Singapore’s security and national interests. And this will require diplomatic skills and a deft touch.

To overcome these challenges, we must stand completely united as one people. Singaporeans and the Government must work closely together, with full trust and confidence in each other. The Government must be able to respond promptly and decisively to the COVID-19 outbreak and the economic situation, and to external developments. We need a capable Government, with the strong backing of the people, to do all that needs to be done on your behalf, and see us through these tumultuous times.